Designing Chicago.com

Greater good studio
	public transit
	the little decision we all make have a large impact on how we all get around the city

	lead designer in 2008 at cta
		do they need more thinking?
		first time roal existed
		'lead designer' on how users interact with the city

	we'd have a great system if it wasn't for all these people
		bus would be on time, people wouldn't be complaining all the time
		when public agency interact with the public
		you can improve or be begruding
		(not user centered)
		the would interact with the public through surveys or townhall metterings
		
	the cta was really at making large boxes moved
		my job - what does it feel like to be in the boxes?
		cta <-> fedex

	how does one design those experence so it becomes meanful

	leadership change after 11 months; given the boot

	prof at SAIC 
		still think about these large city wide issues
		one of the few ways you can really effect a lot of people at onces

	'no more whining' - bothered that i couldn't make more change, don't want to compalin though!

	two years ago found greated good studio
		use design to solve publi problems

	how can we help? we don't have 100 million dollars sitting around; don't have direct line to the cta anymore

	what assests do we have?
		network of people
		rally them
	
	new model for public engagement
		design chicago
		crowd sourced design
			'mob of people?' with sharpies and postit notes

			saw how it workd with academy for global citizens

			critical to ask the right questions

		what happens when we get high quantity of people and quality of understanding
			'unicorn type of reaseach'
			teaching is one of the assest we have
			as a teacher:
				if you have enough faith in your students, structure and patients
				something transformitive occurs
			'the city is a classroom'
				teaching could unlock all of this

		public design team
			create a team of rmember who have never worked if you work in the right way with them

		technology 	| 		need
		can 		|		should

		LET DO THIS
		launch it as a kickstarted? invited everyone we knew, really put ourselves out there
		got press and fanfair!
		kickstarted didn't hit the goal :(
		well what do we do next now

		no pressure after total fuckup, lets do it anyways since no one is watching us anymore
		success hides learning

		we need to simplify story

		1. give your team a name
			'urban agent' sounds kinda sexy?
		2. respect your team's intelligence
			questions on survey aren't used...
			how do you make sense of 'cta is a 4 result'

			observe your commute and look at transit tools
			'elminate ability for partipants to whine'

			we want to spread nuggets of infomration across the city

		funcational needs	|		emotitial needs

		what is the true cost of options

		3. give the team the ability to respond with solutions
			900+ submissions
		
		lets host workshops instead?
		many of our critics: 
			they can't draw
			they haven't designed an app before

		talent is just a training gap
		don't need to be a talented coder

		got a TED prize! how can cities respond to particiaption, press

		still a limited number of people...
			tons of people that we never met			

Design Cloud
Partick Cunningham
	Design cloud
		creative freedom 
		design business/incubator/art gallery/community hub

		indepents who are better togeather
			values, ect

		research 
		participation
		process

	airlab
		collabuation wiht land and ewll artiechs
		working with high school studnets to get engaged witht the community and monitor air quality

	sc+dr
		invited people to join the process
		'graphic facilitation'

Smart Chicago
Dan 
	
webp