--- Day 6: Probably a Fire Hazard ---

Because your neighbors keep defeating you in the holiday house decorating contest year after year, you've decided to deploy one million lights in a 1000x1000 grid.

Furthermore, because you've been especially nice this year, Santa has mailed you instructions on how to display the ideal lighting configuration.

Lights in your grid are numbered from 0 to 999 in each direction; the lights at each corner are at 0,0, 0,999, 999,999, and 999,0. The instructions include whether to turn on, turn off, or toggle various inclusive ranges given as coordinate pairs. Each coordinate pair represents opposite corners of a rectangle, inclusive; a coordinate pair like 0,0 through 2,2 therefore refers to 9 lights in a 3x3 square. The lights all start turned off.

To defeat your neighbors this year, all you have to do is set up your lights by doing the instructions Santa sent you in order.

For example:

turn on 0,0 through 999,999 would turn on (or leave on) every light.
toggle 0,0 through 999,0 would toggle the first line of 1000 lights, turning off the ones that were on, and turning on the ones that were off.
turn off 499,499 through 500,500 would turn off (or leave off) the middle four lights.
After following the instructions, how many lights are lit?




--- Day 7: Some Assembly Required ---

This year, Santa brought little Bobby Tables a set of wires and bitwise logic gates! Unfortunately, little Bobby is a little under the recommended age range, and he needs help assembling the circuit.

Each wire has an identifier (some lowercase letters) and can carry a 16-bit signal (a number from 0 to 65535). A signal is provided to each wire by a gate, another wire, or some specific value. Each wire can only get a signal from one source, but can provide its signal to multiple destinations. A gate provides no signal until all of its inputs have a signal.

The included instructions booklet describes how to connect the parts together: x AND y -> z means to connect wires x and y to an AND gate, and then connect its output to wire z.

For example:

123 -> x means that the signal 123 is provided to wire x.
x AND y -> z means that the bitwise AND of wire x and wire y is provided to wire z.
p LSHIFT 2 -> q means that the value from wire p is left-shifted by 2 and then provided to wire q.
NOT e -> f means that the bitwise complement of the value from wire e is provided to wire f.
Other possible gates include OR (bitwise OR) and RSHIFT (right-shift). If, for some reason, you'd like to emulate the circuit instead, almost all programming languages (for example, C, JavaScript, or Python) provide operators for these gates.

For example, here is a simple circuit:

123 -> x
456 -> y
x AND y -> d
x OR y -> e
x LSHIFT 2 -> f
y RSHIFT 2 -> g
NOT x -> h
NOT y -> i
After it is run, these are the signals on the wires:

d: 72
e: 507
f: 492
g: 114
h: 65412
i: 65079
x: 123
y: 456
In little Bobby's kit's instructions booklet (provided as your puzzle input), what signal is ultimately provided to wire a?



--- Day 8: Matchsticks ---

Space on the sleigh is limited this year, and so Santa will be bringing his list as a digital copy. He needs to know how much space it will take up when stored.

It is common in many programming languages to provide a way to escape special characters in strings. For example, C, JavaScript, Perl, Python, and even PHP handle special characters in very similar ways.

However, it is important to realize the difference between the number of characters in the code representation of the string literal and the number of characters in the in-memory string itself.

For example:

"" is 2 characters of code (the two double quotes), but the string contains zero characters.
"abc" is 5 characters of code, but 3 characters in the string data.
"aaa\"aaa" is 10 characters of code, but the string itself contains six "a" characters and a single, escaped quote character, for a total of 7 characters in the string data.
"\x27" is 6 characters of code, but the string itself contains just one - an apostrophe ('), escaped using hexadecimal notation.
Santa's list is a file that contains many double-quoted string literals, one on each line. The only escape sequences used are \\ (which represents a single backslash), \" (which represents a lone double-quote character), and \x plus two hexadecimal characters (which represents a single character with that ASCII code).

Disregarding the whitespace in the file, what is the number of characters of code for string literals minus the number of characters in memory for the values of the strings in total for the entire file?

For example, given the four strings above, the total number of characters of string code (2 + 5 + 10 + 6 = 23) minus the total number of characters in memory for string values (0 + 3 + 7 + 1 = 11) is 23 - 11 = 12.

--- Day 9: All in a Single Night ---

Every year, Santa manages to deliver all of his presents in a single night.

This year, however, he has some new locations to visit; his elves have provided him the distances between every pair of locations. He can start and end at any two (different) locations he wants, but he must visit each location exactly once. What is the shortest distance he can travel to achieve this?

For example, given the following distances:

London to Dublin = 464
London to Belfast = 518
Dublin to Belfast = 141
The possible routes are therefore:

Dublin -> London -> Belfast = 982
London -> Dublin -> Belfast = 605
London -> Belfast -> Dublin = 659
Dublin -> Belfast -> London = 659
Belfast -> Dublin -> London = 605
Belfast -> London -> Dublin = 982
The shortest of these is London -> Dublin -> Belfast = 605, and so the answer is 605 in this example.

What is the distance of the shortest route?

--- Day 10: Elves Look, Elves Say ---

Today, the Elves are playing a game called look-and-say. They take turns making sequences by reading aloud the previous sequence and using that reading as the next sequence. For example, 211 is read as "one two, two ones", which becomes 1221 (1 2, 2 1s).

Look-and-say sequences are generated iteratively, using the previous value as input for the next step. For each step, take the previous value, and replace each run of digits (like 111) with the number of digits (3) followed by the digit itself (1).

For example:

1 becomes 11 (1 copy of digit 1).
11 becomes 21 (2 copies of digit 1).
21 becomes 1211 (one 2 followed by one 1).
1211 becomes 111221 (one 1, one 2, and two 1s).
111221 becomes 312211 (three 1s, two 2s, and one 1).
Starting with the digits in your puzzle input, apply this process 40 times. What is the length of the result?

Your puzzle input is 1321131112.


--- Day 11: Corporate Policy ---

Santa's previous password expired, and he needs help choosing a new one.

To help him remember his new password after the old one expires, Santa has devised a method of coming up with a password based on the previous one. Corporate policy dictates that passwords must be exactly eight lowercase letters (for security reasons), so he finds his new password by incrementing his old password string repeatedly until it is valid.

Incrementing is just like counting with numbers: xx, xy, xz, ya, yb, and so on. Increase the rightmost letter one step; if it was z, it wraps around to a, and repeat with the next letter to the left until one doesn't wrap around.

Unfortunately for Santa, a new Security-Elf recently started, and he has imposed some additional password requirements:

Passwords must include one increasing straight of at least three letters, like abc, bcd, cde, and so on, up to xyz. They cannot skip letters; abd doesn't count.
Passwords may not contain the letters i, o, or l, as these letters can be mistaken for other characters and are therefore confusing.
Passwords must contain at least two different, non-overlapping pairs of letters, like aa, bb, or zz.
For example:

hijklmmn meets the first requirement (because it contains the straight hij) but fails the second requirement requirement (because it contains i and l).
abbceffg meets the third requirement (because it repeats bb and ff) but fails the first requirement.
abbcegjk fails the third requirement, because it only has one double letter (bb).
The next password after abcdefgh is abcdffaa.
The next password after ghijklmn is ghjaabcc, because you eventually skip all the passwords that start with ghi..., since i is not allowed.
Given Santa's current password (your puzzle input), what should his next password be?

Your puzzle input is cqjxjnds.


--- Day 12: JSAbacusFramework.io ---

Santa's Accounting-Elves need help balancing the books after a recent order. Unfortunately, their accounting software uses a peculiar storage format. That's where you come in.

They have a JSON document which contains a variety of things: arrays ([1,2,3]), objects ({"a":1, "b":2}), numbers, and strings. Your first job is to simply find all of the numbers throughout the document and add them together.

For example:

[1,2,3] and {"a":2,"b":4} both have a sum of 6.
[[[3]]] and {"a":{"b":4},"c":-1} both have a sum of 3.
{"a":[-1,1]} and [-1,{"a":1}] both have a sum of 0.
[] and {} both have a sum of 0.
You will not encounter any strings containing numbers.

What is the sum of all numbers in the document?


--- Day 13: Knights of the Dinner Table ---

In years past, the holiday feast with your family hasn't gone so well. Not everyone gets along! This year, you resolve, will be different. You're going to find the optimal seating arrangement and avoid all those awkward conversations.

You start by writing up a list of everyone invited and the amount their happiness would increase or decrease if they were to find themselves sitting next to each other person. You have a circular table that will be just big enough to fit everyone comfortably, and so each person will have exactly two neighbors.

For example, suppose you have only four attendees planned, and you calculate their potential happiness as follows:

Alice would gain 54 happiness units by sitting next to Bob.
Alice would lose 79 happiness units by sitting next to Carol.
Alice would lose 2 happiness units by sitting next to David.
Bob would gain 83 happiness units by sitting next to Alice.
Bob would lose 7 happiness units by sitting next to Carol.
Bob would lose 63 happiness units by sitting neaxt to David.
Carol would lose 62 happiness units by sitting next to Alice.
Carol would gain 60 happiness units by sitting next to Bob.
Carol would gain 55 happiness units by sitting next to David.
David would gain 46 happiness units by sitting next to Alice.
David would lose 7 happiness units by sitting next to Bob.
David would gain 41 happiness units by sitting next to Carol.
Then, if you seat Alice next to David, Alice would lose 2 happiness units (because David talks so much), but David would gain 46 happiness units (because Alice is such a good listener), for a total change of 44.

If you continue around the table, you could then seat Bob next to Alice (Bob gains 83, Alice gains 54). Finally, seat Carol, who sits next to Bob (Carol gains 60, Bob loses 7) and David (Carol gains 55, David gains 41). The arrangement looks like this:

     +41 +46
+55   David    -2
Carol       Alice
+60    Bob    +54
     -7  +83
After trying every other seating arrangement in this hypothetical scenario, you find that this one is the most optimal, with a total change in happiness of 330.

What is the total change in happiness for the optimal seating arrangement of the actual guest list?



--- Day 14: Reindeer Olympics ---

This year is the Reindeer Olympics! Reindeer can fly at high speeds, but must rest occasionally to recover their energy. Santa would like to know which of his reindeer is fastest, and so he has them race.

Reindeer can only either be flying (always at their top speed) or resting (not moving at all), and always spend whole seconds in either state.

For example, suppose you have the following Reindeer:

Comet can fly 14 km/s for 10 seconds, but then must rest for 127 seconds.
Dancer can fly 16 km/s for 11 seconds, but then must rest for 162 seconds.
After one second, Comet has gone 14 km, while Dancer has gone 16 km. After ten seconds, Comet has gone 140 km, while Dancer has gone 160 km. On the eleventh second, Comet begins resting (staying at 140 km), and Dancer continues on for a total distance of 176 km. On the 12th second, both reindeer are resting. They continue to rest until the 138th second, when Comet flies for another ten seconds. On the 174th second, Dancer flies for another 11 seconds.

In this example, after the 1000th second, both reindeer are resting, and Comet is in the lead at 1120 km (poor Dancer has only gotten 1056 km by that point). So, in this situation, Comet would win (if the race ended at 1000 seconds).

Given the descriptions of each reindeer (in your puzzle input), after exactly 2503 seconds, what distance has the winning reindeer traveled?



--- Day 15: Science for Hungry People ---

Today, you set out on the task of perfecting your milk-dunking cookie recipe. All you have to do is find the right balance of ingredients.

Your recipe leaves room for exactly 100 teaspoons of ingredients. You make a list of the remaining ingredients you could use to finish the recipe (your puzzle input) and their properties per teaspoon:

capacity (how well it helps the cookie absorb milk)
durability (how well it keeps the cookie intact when full of milk)
flavor (how tasty it makes the cookie)
texture (how it improves the feel of the cookie)
calories (how many calories it adds to the cookie)
You can only measure ingredients in whole-teaspoon amounts accurately, and you have to be accurate so you can reproduce your results in the future. The total score of a cookie can be found by adding up each of the properties (negative totals become 0) and then multiplying together everything except calories.

For instance, suppose you have these two ingredients:

Butterscotch: capacity -1, durability -2, flavor 6, texture 3, calories 8
Cinnamon: capacity 2, durability 3, flavor -2, texture -1, calories 3
Then, choosing to use 44 teaspoons of butterscotch and 56 teaspoons of cinnamon (because the amounts of each ingredient must add up to 100) would result in a cookie with the following properties:

A capacity of 44*-1 + 56*2 = 68
A durability of 44*-2 + 56*3 = 80
A flavor of 44*6 + 56*-2 = 152
A texture of 44*3 + 56*-1 = 76
Multiplying these together (68 * 80 * 152 * 76, ignoring calories for now) results in a total score of 62842880, which happens to be the best score possible given these ingredients. If any properties had produced a negative total, it would have instead become zero, causing the whole score to multiply to zero.

Given the ingredients in your kitchen and their properties, what is the total score of the highest-scoring cookie you can make?

--- Day 16: Aunt Sue ---

Your Aunt Sue has given you a wonderful gift, and you'd like to send her a thank you card. However, there's a small problem: she signed it "From, Aunt Sue".

You have 500 Aunts named "Sue".

So, to avoid sending the card to the wrong person, you need to figure out which Aunt Sue (which you conveniently number 1 to 500, for sanity) gave you the gift. You open the present and, as luck would have it, good ol' Aunt Sue got you a My First Crime Scene Analysis Machine! Just what you wanted. Or needed, as the case may be.

The My First Crime Scene Analysis Machine (MFCSAM for short) can detect a few specific compounds in a given sample, as well as how many distinct kinds of those compounds there are. According to the instructions, these are what the MFCSAM can detect:

children, by human DNA age analysis.
cats. It doesn't differentiate individual breeds.
Several seemingly random breeds of dog: samoyeds, pomeranians, akitas, and vizslas.
goldfish. No other kinds of fish.
trees, all in one group.
cars, presumably by exhaust or gasoline or something.
perfumes, which is handy, since many of your Aunts Sue wear a few kinds.
In fact, many of your Aunts Sue have many of these. You put the wrapping from the gift into the MFCSAM. It beeps inquisitively at you a few times and then prints out a message on ticker tape:

children: 3
cats: 7
samoyeds: 2
pomeranians: 3
akitas: 0
vizslas: 0
goldfish: 5
trees: 3
cars: 2
perfumes: 1
You make a list of the things you can remember about each Aunt Sue. Things missing from your list aren't zero - you simply don't remember the value.

What is the number of the Sue that got you the gift?

